Do you see Spear as a tragic hero?
Let's start with that.
Absolutely not.
I think that's, you know, the only tragic thing about Spear
only limited, was unable to pronounce the words that he so wanted to pronounce about his guilt.
That was the only tragic thing about him.
He had a wonderful time under Hitler.
Let's face it.
And I think we have to make that very clear.
Oh, doubly clear, triply clear.
And one of the problems, you see, is, in fact, with the many people, or with many of the people, because there were some exceptions, who interviewed him, that they were unable to make
the distinction between the Speer of under Hitler and the Speer of later.
And so they really weren't very interested, let's face it, in the Speer of later.
They weren't?
No, they weren't.
Why is that?
Well, because, you know, not the sensational, but I mean the really interesting thing, part of it, was the horror of the Speer of the days under Hitler.
and whatever he did with himself later, except for the two books, of course, and his psychological problems and developments.
Well, they weren't really interested in that.
To me, though, it's the most interesting thing.
Yes, but that's why you're talking to me now, having written this book.
But the point is that... How can a man of this intelligence be seduced into something so unspeakable?
Absolutely.
Wouldn't you think that they would want to know that?
But very few people did.
That's the crying question of our century, I think.
It is the crying, but you know, I'll tell you something interesting as you're bringing this up.
I think it really is a question of how life has developed.
For instance, just a little example.
When I wrote Into That Darkness, you know about that book, don't you?
Yes.
We're going to have a conversation from which I'll derive a piece.
Whatever, yes.
Well, that was the book where I talked with the commandant of Treblinka, Steinberg.
And I did that in 1974.
I mean, I did that in 1971.
The book was published in 1974.
And although it was, you know, well-received, it had problems.
And the problems were that people really could not bear the thought, some people, sorry, some people, not bear the thought of my wishing to talk to someone like that.
Well, now you see, this sort of esprit, you know,
Really, this atmosphere continued for a long time.
And it is only now, since maybe five, six years, that this atmosphere has changed.
And that people are beginning to, as you say, ask themselves how or why.
And as they are now asking themselves that, permit themselves to ask themselves that, they see why someone like I or others might wish to speak to people.
you know, to find out.
See, if he is willing to open up to you or to anyone, then he does offer an uncommon window, doesn't he, into the madness, so to speak.
Yes, he does.
And, of course, they were all interested in the madness.
But what they were not interested in is the psychomoral side of the man, which is what I'm interested in.
The individual man.
That's right, exactly.
Because I think the individual man, in the end, the individual man, under all circumstances, you know, the individual, if you like, the individual man today in Bosnia, the individual man in Nigeria, the individual man in the Khmer Rouge, we don't know enough about individual man, and if we don't, we'll never understand the society, we'll never understand the social and pathological developments.
Do you agree?
Oh, of course, absolutely.
And it is interesting to me that you didn't pursue him.
It was the other way around.
Yeah, he pursued me.
Yes, and that is a question.
I'm not necessarily suggesting that he pursued you, but he certainly made the first contact.
Oh, yes, and he made more than the first contact.
I mean, he, you know, when he felt that I was, and I was, reticent after he had made this first contact, when I didn't, when he suggested that would I like to come to Heidelberg and
would i like to come and see him i didn't say oh yes i'll come next week or if i can you know something i said well it's very kind of you um nice to talk to you and uh he then called me practically every week do you think he was seeking approbation do you think no he was he was really not he was questing for an apologist no no no you see that isn't it he was
But it took me a long time to understand this.
All this was in there, of course.
I know, I'm just saying that, of course, I did try to explain all this.
No, he was looking, he was trying to find someone who would force him to, or would help him, if you like, to pronounce this terrible guilt that he felt.
Now, I was not the first one, you know, he came with this.
There were three ahead of me.
Three religious men, in fact.
One pastor, Casalis, one Jewish rabbi, Abba Gais, and one Catholic monk or priest, Pater Athanasius.
All these three he came to and asked them to help him become a different man.
And this asking them to become a different man was, in fact, to...
help him seek redemption, if you like.
You know, I'm putting it in these terms, but you know what I mean.
Sure, of course, yeah.
And then it didn't quite work in any of these three cases.
Basically, I mean, I've often asked myself, why?
Because they were all three, you know, far more educated men than I am.
Because they weren't professional writers.
No, they were not.
They couldn't have written it.
But they could do it, you know.
And they were also...
All three, which is very interesting, they, all three, and they were the only ones I have met, all three understood what his need was.
But they couldn't somehow, I don't know whether it was time or whether they simply found each different ways, they found him so complicated that they found different ways of advising him to deal with this problem.
It's interesting that Abba Geis, the Jewish rabbi, which is, I think, amazing, he was the one who finally told him, and he wrote him this too, the letter is in the, forgive yourself, forgive yourself.
You know, do you consider this a biography?
No, I don't.
And perhaps you can distinguish what it is from... Yes, I think it is a... It really is a...
Somebody this morning who was talking to me called it a kind of detective story.
Well, it is a kind of detective story.
It really is an attempt to unravel.
You see, of course the biographical details appear as a result, but it is to unravel this unbelievably complicated personality, and to unravel
this one, what he called himself, to me, the central problem of his life, which was his knowledge, his knowledge of Hitler's horrors, which he could never personally admit to.
He could admit that he, as a member, as he did at N端rnberg, that he, as a member of Hitler's government, was responsible.
But he could not admit
that he was personally guilty.
He was not culpable.
He was not culpable, that's exactly it.
In his view.
And it is a very... You think otherwise, however.
Well, I think he was culpable, of course.
I don't think... Perhaps I should qualify that.
I don't think that he was culpable in the sense of, for instance, being personally guilty, for instance, of the murder of the Jews.
He wasn't.
he had he had simply nothing to do with it you know he was guilty of that as part of the whole thing but he was not personally culpable of it he was personally culpable for the bringing into germany of course and then the treatment of the slave laborers of whom hundreds of thousands died that he was personally culpable of how do you suppose
you point out that given the criteria upon which the others were executed, he then, by applying the same standards, should have gone off to the gallows with them, you feel.
But I think that.
And he thought that.
So do you think that he felt he kind of, he, like O.J.
Simpson, he beat the rap?
No, I thought you were going to say something else, but you almost did and then didn't quite.
And I did.
No.
You see,
In a way, he felt both guilty and, that's really odd, for a while he felt ashamed for not having been executed.
Can you understand that?
Of course.
And that was the time when Pastor Casales met him.
And I was profoundly impressed by this shame.
Well, because I think that there is a kernel of decency in it.
Yes, but you know, it's interesting that you say that.
There was, and yet you see, I mean, there was a kernel of decency from his birth, you know, and from his childhood.
It was there.
I don't know whether you... What makes him interesting.
Yes, indeed, indeed.
I don't know whether you got that far, but, you know, he gave me a whole series of essays he wrote as a young boy and as a student.
And they were absolutely fascinating.
I'm able only to reproduce a little bit of this in them because, you know, it's already much too long.
But I have many more.
And each of these essays is really an exercise in morality.
Isn't that fascinating?
And when I read them, you know, I was dumbfounded.
And I said to him, because I read them while I was with him in the night, you know, I'd read them and the next morning I would talk.
And I said,
How could a man who wrote those essays and showed that kind of morality become as devoid of morality as you became?
And that's the central question, isn't it?
Absolutely.
And what was his response?
Well, his answer was, and you know, he was not avoiding to reply.
He simply didn't know.
He said, well, that is the great mystery, isn't it?
I'm sorry, that's the what?
The great mystery.
And it is, of course, though...
To me, it only partly remained a mystery.
I mean, I did, I think, understand, and oddly enough, I think with me, he also came to understand that, he didn't like to hear this, but he came to understand that it was this absolutely extraordinary, and a lot of people won't accept this, you know, but it was this absolutely extraordinary love he bore Hitler.
And you maintained that it was certainly not a homoerotic kind of thing.
Well, I agreed actually with Alexander Michalich, who was one of Germany's great psychoanalysts.
Michalich wrote that it had a very strong erotic component, and I think it did, but it was not homosexual.
It was a very German feeling.
I really, I wonder whether, I wonder whether we could find this in many other countries.
The Germans are very romantic, you know, in their hero worship and their affections quite often.
I mean, you find, well, I mean, if you compare it, I don't wish to compare it directly, but if you, you're too young for this, but at a moment, at the time of when I was, when I came to America first, the first time, which was during the war in 42,
there was this incredible adoration of Frank Sinatra.
Now, you know, this was something absolutely extraordinary.
I remember going to a Frank Sinatra concert, telling this for the first time in my life, with Eric Severide.
Do you remember Eric Severide?
Yes, I liked him.
Eric Severide is a great friend of mine, and we went to a concert in Washington, which he gave, and we watched this.
And you know, both of us had the same feeling.
My God.
my God, if this kind of adoration, this kind of charisma effect can affect people this way in America.
You know the potential for other... This was 1942.
This was 1942.
So this was nine years after the arrival of Fitness.
Oh, absolutely.
But I think we both... But you're projecting this from... I'm projecting this, and we felt at the time that...
that this potential, you know, for adoration, and for adoration of, well, I'm not saying he was unworthy, I mean, you know, but... I understand what you're saying, but you're saying that there's this capacity in the human being that is perhaps endemic to the species.
Yes, and that is not, what I was trying to say, and you caught it, was that it is not peculiar to the Germans.
But there is a romantic thing, which is... I've seen these films from the 30s, and for Germans to say we were forced, that's baloney.
You see these crowds of these adoring, nearly mesmerized people, and it's frightening.
It is frightening.
He's been accused of mass hypnosis.
Well, you know, we laugh about this.
Well, we don't laugh about it, but we don't like thinking that this is possible.
But I must say that having had myself two experiences,
You mentioned that very early in the book.
Of Hitler.
At 12 years old.
Yeah, 11 years old.
I had my first experience of the Nazis.
And, you know, I found myself in N端rnberg, as a matter of fact, in N端rnberg, as I described, the N端rnberg party rally, screaming highly.
I didn't even know what they were screaming.
I was looking at the boy, a young man next to me, to see what it was he was screaming.
And I could see him, you know, shape the world.
And so I followed this, and I also then screamed, heil, heil, heil, you know.
I didn't know why I shouted heil.
I didn't feel any heil, but something happened.
You know, now you can say that this is all gobbledygook.
All right, but it isn't.
Just checking.
I know.
Go ahead, I'm sorry.
No, that was the end of that one.
Is Speer a metaphor for anything in your view?
A metaphor?
You mean a symbol?
Yeah.
Well, I think he's perhaps not a metaphor or a symbol, but he is... I mean, let's go beyond.
He's a case study of something.
Yes, to me, he's ultra-important in the sense... Well, he's ultra-important in many ways, but he's ultra-important to me in the sense that if it can happen, you know, to a man as intelligent as that, to a man, as I say, in this of excellence, which he was...
To this degree, he can become corrupted to this degree.
He can become devoid of morality.
As I call it, his morality is extinguished in him.
If this can happen to a man as excellent as that, then I think the danger of it all should be very, very clear to us.
So it's a cautionary tale?
It is a cautionary tale in a way.
I mean, I didn't think of it.
You were saying this for the first time.
I mean, I didn't think of this, but why not?
There's a question mark at the end.
Why not?
But why not?
Yes, it is a cautionary tale.
Certainly there were moments, there were moments, you know, while I was with him, and as you know, I was with him not only the first time for three weeks, but a number of times afterwards until he died, when I found him quite frightening.
Just momentarily.
He would let himself go and then he would catch himself.
That's absolutely right.
There were those moments, however, when you said, my God.
Yeah, there were those moments.
There were not many of those.
But one is enough.
Well, there were several.
But by the same token, to be fair, there were those other moments when subjects came up which were related to this question of guilt.
and this question of knowledge, and I saw him change.
I saw his body change.
You know, people can lie in words, but body language is something else, and you cannot lie with your body.
When you start to sweat, and when your muscles begin to go flaccid, and when you face your comparatively young face, which he had,
and strong face turns into an old face.
That you cannot fake.
And I saw this on perhaps only two or three occasions.
It was quite enough.
There was a novel published in England a couple of years ago, which I really liked, the Fatherland novel.
Oh, yes.
By Harris.
Robert Harris.
I mean, it was a what if.
It was quite a what if.
Yeah.
But to take the what if a bit further, what if, you know, Germany
as Hitler and Hitler had survived.
And he was very close to it.
Well, how do you suppose Speer would have... He would not have felt one bit of that guilt.
So he'd have been a totally different person.
He would have remained the person he had become under Hitler.
I have no illusions about that whatsoever.
That does not mean, because I can hear those cynics say immediately, aha, she's admitting that,
She's therefore admitting that he was being pragmatic with his guilt feelings.
No.
No, you see?
I think we must see people, and this is something that I'm trying to get across both here and already did in my book, Into That Darkness, about Shtanga.
I think we have to look at people during each period of their lives
within the context of the circumstances in which they live.
It is pointless not to, you know.
I mean, for instance, let us take a terrible scenario.
Let us take the scenario that America would become a country.
I'm now dreaming a fatherland, a horrible, horrible fatherland dream.
Let us imagine that America would become a country in which whites were no longer tolerated.
This is, you know, it is a nightmare, but it is an impossible nightmare.
Especially since we outnumber the whites outnumber the others.
Yes, but let us just imagine this.
Kafkaesque.
Kafkaesque, exactly.
If we imagine this, I assure you that the behavior of every single person, you, me, anyone, would become different.
to the behavior these same people, us, demonstrated for years before.
And this applies, for instance, extremely strongly and gave me many sleepless nights to the extermination camps, where people who had been the most honorable, the most, you know, people with greatest integrity and morality and
honesty, and you name it, generosity, in order to remain alive, they had to become different.
You know, it is something which is extremely difficult for people to assimilate, because we don't want to think of this.
But you see, it is true that circumstances do affect the conduct of people in an
in a very, very extraordinary way.
This is no excuse for anybody, and no accusation either for anybody, but it's a fact, and maybe we don't consider it enough.
Did you emerge for... How many hours do you feel you spent with such a period?
Well, I... I mean, actually interviewing them.
Yes, because I don't call them interviews, you see.
We had a talking relationship.
which, as you know, he saw.
Well, you might distinguish that from me now.
Why don't you follow interviews?
Because an interview is where you ask questions and you get answers.
Or you don't get answers.
A dialogue is something else.
But it was a journalistic exercise.
It was a journalistic exercise in the sense that he always knew that whatever he answered or whatever we talked about
would see print.
In that sense.
Absolutely.
In that sense, it's true.
That was part of the tacit understanding between the two?
Absolutely.
I mean, I told him this from the word go, A, to remind him that this would happen, and B, I also told him from the word go, as I always do to whoever I speak to, what my own feelings were, in this case, toward him.
And I told him that I did not believe his mere corpus,
that I did not like his arrogance, that I thought he was extremely self-centered, and that I had in fact never liked him very much.
And that I would try to, whether I would go to like him or not, I didn't know, but that I would try to break through this wall he had erected of whatever it was.
And on that basis, we began to work together.
So you see, this is not really interviews in the sense of terms of that.
OK, but you spent a lot of time with them.
Yeah, I spent, you said how many hours.
Well, I'm just... That's almost impossible.
I mean, certainly many hundreds.
But there was a point.
There was not just a number, but I guess what I'm interested in knowing is at what point did you really feel you had a sense of him?
Well, after the first three weeks... And that you really had the substance to put it in the book.
Yeah, yeah.
Absolutely, that's a good question.
I mean, after the first three weeks we spent together, where I...
except to go to sleep.
I never left him.
You see, I stayed with him too for two of these three years.
Was there anxiety for you?
Was there a sense that I still don't have it?
Not even knowing what it is, but... No.
I had this sense of anxiety slightly more with Stange, years before, where I was trying to get something much more... You know, much more... Yes, exactly.
I don't need to put words in there.
No, but I mean, that's right.
You sense it right.
With Speyer, I did not have this anxiety, I tell you, because... I'll tell you something funny.
Well, not funny, but... With Speyer, as of, say, the fourth or fifth day we had spent together, I began to feel that I was... Whether I got...
got to the kernel of his problem, which was his knowledge and his sense of guilt.
Whether or not I got that, I realized after about four or five days that this man had an awful lot to teach me.
You know, to teach me.
From the moment when he really started to talk, I thought, well, I'm sort of convinced, you know, very, very honestly, and we
we delved much further into his relationship with Hitler and his own analysis of Hitler.
I knew that I would get on.
When you asked me, was it a biography, I didn't finish my reply.
You see, this book is as much about Hitler as it is about Speer, almost.
Of course, not really as much, but it tries as much to understand Hitler
as it does try to understand Speer.
Well, Hitler's up here, and he's not around.
But to get there, I think we have to use him.
Yes, it's even slightly different than that.
See, I don't think you can understand Speer without understanding the relationship between him and Hitler.
And I don't think you can quite understand Hitler without realizing that he was in need, I'm not saying capable of, in need of the relationship
that he had this bear.
I think that that is extremely interesting and has given us a lot, a lot of new understanding.
At least that is why historian friends who have worked on Hitler and have read this, they feel this.
Alan Bullock felt this very strongly, that this gives us a completely new understanding of the Nazi mind.
Did you come away from this with, what for you is the unanswered question?
What did he fail to give you, either directly or indirectly?
I think the only really unanswered question is the one that he called the great mystery.
You know, how it could, how love can corrupt man.
That is the unanswered question.
I'm not so sure that we will ever find an answer for this.
But he did not fail to give me any other answer I was seeking.
including his guilt.
You know, it's interesting.
I'm looking at the book as we sit here, and I see that it's tight, and it's black and white.
And it's black on white.
There are no gray shadings there.
And do you find, to just take this into the book and the subject, do you find any gray shadings
any halftones with this man, or is it... Well, I... You're putting this... I mean, you're saying... You're asking a question which, you know, is one of the practically main themes of every talk I have given over the last five weeks in five countries, that one of the important things to remember is that no one is black or white.
That this gray, the gray shading, as you call it,
The grey is actually the principal part of us all.
And unless we are able... You see, with a man like Speer... Sorry to come back upon myself.
With a man like Speer, most people... There were exceptions, but most people who talked to him, or tried to talk to him, they could only address the white or the black.
The black being the Speer under Hitler,
the white being the man who had written these two books, I'm not speaking of his last books because it was so terrible, but these two books, inside the Third Reich and Spandau, Spandau's Secret Diaries.
Now, they were addressing these two facets of this personality.
What they didn't address at all is the person in between, and the person in between really was much more interesting.
because the person in between was the one who was trying to wrestle with both with what he had been and what he had become.
And that was the most interesting part.
I think you already addressed yourself to this question in anticipation of it, but I have it on my notes to understand the mystery of Hitler as, of course, to perhaps harness about that.
I was just wondering,
Speer, I guess I'm... Speer, no, you're doing very well, yeah.
Is he, for you, a kind of Rosetta Stone by which you can... Well, Speer, I mean.
Well, I don't know that I can say that, but I think that you were just asking, you were just bringing up the mystery of Hitler.
Well, I haven't really covered that.
I mean, the mystery of Hitler is, of course,
No, there is a point there which would be worth mentioning, which is, you know, I am an enormous believer, I don't know whether you've read my books, my various books, but I've written two books on very unhappy children, which is my other area of so-called expertise, and by working with these children, some of whom had killed other children.
What a depressing story.
It's very, very interesting.
And others who have become child prostitutes because of the chaos in their lives, you know.
I have come to absolutely believe, and I am convinced of this, that all children are born good, you know.
All human beings are born good.
And then something happens.
But, then there comes something, someone like Hitler.
thank god there aren't many like that but it it defies my belief you know because we we don't know you know nobody knows you you realize that that nobody has ever been able to probe hitler's childhood not beyond a certain point i mean they know that he had a stepfather who who beat him but
Other children have been beaten.
So what's missing?
Documents?
People who... Nobody ever tried early enough because, of course, early enough would have been during Hitler's time because he was not young enough, you see.
He was not that old when he died, though, was he?
Well, he was... What was he?
I can't remember his age when he died.
But he was already in his 50s when he came to power.
Was he in his 50s?
Yes, he was 40.
Late 40s, anyway.
When he came to Parliament, of course, nobody dared then to investigate his childhood.
You can imagine.
That's a great parallel.
My God, what it would have been.
So nobody did.
And the result, sadly enough, is that no one has seen any of the witnesses of his childhood.
So we don't know what he was like as a child.
That would be fascinating.
Oh, God, wouldn't it be.
Oh, I would have given my eye teeth to have done that, really.
But it didn't happen.
And so, as a result, we are faced with this man who really was evil, you know.
I mean, it is very difficult for me to admit that a person is evil, you know, because it's very difficult.
I don't believe in original sin.
Intrinsically evil.
I mean, I can take, for instance, I don't know, I can take a serial murderer,
And I can find, not reasons for his, not reasons for his killings, but I can find reasons, if I look, and I have of course found, reasons for the way he developed and for his pathology.
You know, but for Hitler, who seemed to be made of hate.
I don't mean, I don't mean, quote, only, unquote, only for the Jews or against the Jews.
He had hate.
for so many things.
I'm of Greek extraction, and Greeks were... Well, I mean, he didn't exactly admire... Well, he admired Greek civilization, I think.
Well, the ancients.
Yeah, the ancients, exactly.
But he didn't... I mean, but above all, you see, he hated all Slavs, and certainly intended to decimate all... He respected the English for some reason.
Yes, he loved the English.
Isn't that extraordinary?
Weird.
But, no, to come back to this, this was a man filled with hate.
How did this hate, where did it come from?
And, you know, there I am tempted to feel that I have to go against my own faith in good.
Do you think the answer is to be found in his youth?
I'm afraid so.
You know, I hate to say this.
I mean, I'm saying it to you, and of course you can use it, but I will add that I...
I am deadly afraid of psychobabble.
I really am scared of it.
So I'm very... And you really... And I don't sense it in here, by the way, thank goodness.
No, I was very careful.
And I should imagine it'd be a sitting duck for somebody who has the... Yeah, yeah, yes.
The mindset to do a psycho... Yeah, I know.
And I mean, for instance, you... Well, I must say that.
The books that have been written...
But about Hitler, too, one could so easily, you know, invent psychobabble, but really, I mean, so many things have been said, so many nonsensous things.
I mean, who cares whether he had one testicle or two testicles, you know, I mean, what the hell does it matter, you know, and all these things.
Well, isn't your show like pigsty?
No, I mean, really, really, I ask you.
I mean, if you want to go to that experience.
Isn't it absurd?
So that really isn't it.
But I think the, you know, there is,
There is yet a field for discovery, and we won't be able to do it with Hitler, but perhaps we can do it with someone else to discover the real origin of evil in a human being.
It's wonderful.
It's a wonderful thing.
It's what I'm looking for, you see.
And so this, in a way, does fit in with your previous work, doesn't it?
It fits in, but it's not.
You see, I always say this, that, of course, Speer was not an evil man.
He said he allowed himself to be seduced.
He became monstrous.
I mean, the things that he knew... Well, that's a good quote, but he became monstrous.
He became monstrous because he allowed himself to remain within the monstrosity.
And what he denies is his cognizance in the fact that he became monstrous.
Well, no, what he denied... Do you think he did it mindfully?
What?
Did he mindfully become monstrous?
Was he aware of what was becoming?
No, you see, you're absolutely right.
I mean, your question is quite right, because he didn't.
I mean, for instance, I confronted him not once, but perhaps, I don't know, 10, 15 times, time and again, because I kept coming back.
In the book, you will see that I keep coming back to things.
Now, some not so clever reviewers, they've all been wonderful to me, but some of them,
not so clever, say, oh, well, she does repeat herself.
But the only way to get to the, you know, to the depth of these people is to go back and back and back and start again and hope that they will put it differently.
Do you understand?
I just had a book of my own published and it's had some wonderful reviews.
What is it?
It's a book on bibliomania.
It's called Gentle Madness and it's about 2,500 years.
It's wonderful.
What a wonderful title.
It's an interesting subject and...
the reviewer for the New York Times did a full-page review in the New York Times, and he said it's repetitious.
Well, obviously, if you're trying to trace something through... Well, there you are.
There you are.
He said he tends to be repetitious on the one hand, but then he also says he wishes there were other things that I did, you know?
Yeah, yeah.
You can't satisfy them.
No, you can't.
You can't win entirely because they... You know why?
Because most people have very simple minds.
I mean, even extremely intelligent people.
And they are spoiled by a sort of, well, a media thing.
It isn't just the media, but it's also now a certain kind of book, and also certainly academic books, which always go from one, you know, they're very sequential.
And simplistic.
Very simplistic.
compared to the speaking, not all.
But I think the kinds of books you're describing... Yes, but I mean, for instance, a book by Alan Bullock, like, you know, Stalin and Hitler, parallel, you know, one.
I thought it had its weaknesses, though.
That was pretty good, then.
Did you?
Yeah, that was pretty good.
I love that.
I think there are some... But the measure is, I have the book.
Yeah, the book.
I've kept it.
Exactly, exactly.
But on the whole, people look at things, you know, very simply, and they say, well, we must go from one thing to another, and you must not repeat, and they don't understand that if you're going to understand anything like you with your, you know, your bibliominia, and I with my trying to delve into these absolutely horribly difficult to be delved into personalities, you have to keep going back.
There is another thing.
You see, you could go back and not tell your reader you have gone back.
That is if you don't believe in the capacity of your reader to read.
Now, I have a great belief in the capacity of the reader to read and to understand.
But not every reader.
Not every reader.
The people who read this book have the capacity to read.
but this book is not for every reader.
I don't know.
I think it's for far more readers than we think.
You see, I think that if you and I write, and I have an idea you probably do, I don't know, but I haven't read it, but from the way you speak, if we write understandably rather than pretentiously or highfalutinely, if we write like we speak,
And if we write humanly, rather than academically, people will be able to follow it.
There are things they will perhaps, you know, where it's very thick paragraphs, they might jump.
I have to tell you, Kate, I was interviewed by this person, Brian Lamb, for C-SPAN.
Yes.
But he's very good.
And I'm on this Sunday night, if you happen to see.
Oh, really?
Oh, hell, I'll be gone.
I'll be in the front foot.
Well, if he asked me a question, I'd certainly be this on tape about that.
You know, I'm absolutely amazed what is happening to this book in England, and in Germany, and in Holland.
I mean, in Holland, it became a bestseller in one week.
In England, it's been on the bestseller list for four weeks.
But what is interesting is how many young people are buying it.
You know, it's expensive.
Well, that's encouraging, isn't it?
Isn't it encouraging?
Yeah, that really is.
I think so.
Because people are trying to deny that... That's right.
Last night I was invited to a dinner party here in Boston, and there was a very learned man, a very learned professor, and he told me that the young don't read.
It's true.
Well, I don't know.
But my daughters read.
And they read all the time.
People say the young don't read.
You say it's true.
The next thing you say, your daughter reads.
I can't tell you how many daughters and sons read who I know.
And they're not people I know intimately, but I know all of them.
And in England, where I went around speaking, just like I do here, in these bookstores, these kids came up.
and asked me to sign the book.
And I'd say, but my goodness, how can you pay for this?
When a kid comes up to me and asks to sign the book, I stop, and I talk to the kid.
Me too.
And I want to write something nice in there, and I thank them.
I wish them the best, and I want it all in the book.
I have to run before I get a ticket.
Just tell me briefly what you're working on next.
Well, I don't know.
I have to get over this book now.
It takes some getting over.
And after all, you know,
It's being published in eight countries.
I mean, I have to go from country to country.
And I love the fact that you didn't compromise on it.
It's all there.
My book is 638 pages.
There you are.
And mine is a $35 book, as this is a $35 book.
Well, we have something in common, haven't we?
You would kindly inscribe this for me.
Absolutely.
Now, have we got a pen?
I've got a pen.